It’s good to see you all and nice to see you all in one spot.
 
Look, Director, thank you for that introduction.  And thank you all for the work of the Competition Council.  It’s reducing costs and delivering results for the American people.
 
I’ve said before, capitalism without competition is — is not capitalism; it’s exploitation.  And that’s what we’ve been seeing.  Although it’s in small scale in the minds of many people, when you add up those numbers, they’re gigantic.  And we’re taking it on.
 
Here’s what’s happening: The pandemic disrupted the supply chains.  We all know that.  I — I remember — I didn’t think as many people had any idea what a supply chain was, and we all learned really quickly.
 
It drove up costs on everything from smartphones to automobiles.  But it also — now those costs are making things — have come down, but the prices haven’t come down.  They’ve stayed up.  They’ve stayed high, and the profits have soared.  And it’s time for those prices to come back down.
 
Look, the good news is inflation is the lowest it’s been in three years.  In the last — in last year alone, inflation came down by two thirds.  We have one of the lowest inflation rates in the world.
 
Many companies have done the right thing: They’ve helped lower costs for Americans.  But even as supply chains are back to normal, some companies are still not passing along the savings to their consumers.  Many corporations are raising their prices to pad their profits, charging folks more and more for less and less.
 
In fact, some of the small snack companies you won’t and — think you won’t even notice what they’re doing when they charge you just as much for the same size bag of potato chips, only it has a hell of a lot fewer chips in it.
 
I’ll tell you what — I’ll tell you who did notice: the Cookie Monster.  (Laughter.)  He pointed out cookies are — his cookies are getting smaller.  He’s paying the same price.  (Laughs.)  I was stunned when I found out that’s what actually happened.  (Laughter.)
 
But some companies are also adding junk fees — you know, the hidden costs that are added to the — your bill without your knowledge.  And some companies have been even caught breaking the law while overcharging consumers.
 
The American people are tired of being played for suckers.  I mean, it’s one thing — no matter how much money you make, no matter how rich or poor or middle class you are, you don’t like being taken advantage of.
 
That’s why today I’m launching a new Strike Force to — on Unfair and Illegal Pricing to crack down on companies who break the law while keeping prices high for American consumers.
 
The new strike force will be led by the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission.
 
If you keep prices high while engaging in illegal practices that are fraudulent or unfair or deceptive or anti-competitive, you — we will enforce the law.  We will enforce the law.
 
Today, we’re also announcing that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is finalizing a rule that will help stop some credit card companies from ripping you off with late fees.  Under the law, banks are not supposed to charge late fees that are higher than the cost the banks have to engage to collect the late payment.
 
But we estimate banks were generating five times more in late fees than it costs to collect late payments.  They’re padding their profit margins and charging hardworking Americans more than — a cumulative effort — a number — $14 billion in 2022. 
 
With the announcement of thi- — of this new rule, late fees are now going to be down to $8 — $8 instead of the current average of $32 late-fee payments.

This action will collectively save families $10 billion in credit card late fees every year.  That’s the average of $220 in savings annually for more than 45 million Americans who typically have to pay late fees.  That’s a lot of money.
 
And let me close with this.  Fair competition is the key to my economic vision to build an economy from the middle out and the bottom up, not the top down.  And it’s working.
 
Wages are up more than prices.  Unemployment has reached historic lows.  Families are finally getting a little breathing room. 
 
Prices are still too high, and they shouldn’t be this high.  That’s why we’re going to do everything we can to keep lowering costs for working — hardworking families.
 
With that, I’m going to turn this over to Lael, the Director of National Economic Council.  But I’m supposed to leave for a meeting with — meeting with the Business Roundtable on the telephone.  But I’m going to hang around and listen a little bit. 
 
So, with your permission, I’d like to stay a few — and my staff will tell — tell me when the drop-dead hour occurs.  (Laughter.)  They’ll pass me a note.

But thank you all for all the work you’re doing.  I really mean it.  It makes a big difference. 

When I raised this issue a year or so ago with some of my team, they thought, “No one is going to care much about it.”  Well, they didn’t sit at my kitchen table when I was growing up.  You care a whole lot when you’re being played for a sucker, no matter how much money you have. 

So, thank you for what you’re doing. 
